
Beyond Modeling of Categorical Emotions In a Neural Network Based Social Chatbot 

Conversation modeling is an important task in natural language understanding and machine intelligence. One of the key improvements for conversation modeling is to make the experience with the AI agent more human like. Generating human-like responses improves the overall user experience. Motivated with this very thought, the work of my Master thesis revolves around three important tasks. In Task 1, I developed a crossmodel emotion mapping on message conversation corpus. I assigned the corresponding categorical emotion scores for each category(Happy, Sad, Anger, Other) and dimensional emotion scores(Valence, Arousal, Dominance) corresponding to each message. The categorical scores deﬁne a percentage of each category of emotion shared in the message. In Task 2, I focused on emotion analysis of the user utterance by training an emotion classiﬁer on the corpus developed in Task 1. In Task 3, I used the developed corpus in Task 1 and conclusions from the feature engineering performed in Task 2 to ﬁnally feed the chatbot’s Hierarchical Recurrent Encoder-Decoder based architecture with the right set of features. I performed evaluation for the classiﬁer developed in Task 2 on CodaLab Testset for EmoContext: Semeval task 20191 to achieve the best accuracy of around 74%. I performed human evaluation for Task 3 with 30 participants to conclude that more than 95% users found that the responses generated was sensible to the context of the question asked. Another conclusion from the human evaluation was that the emotional responses generated corresponding to the emotion category chosen was reﬂected as an emotion in the generated responses with an average accuracy for each categorical emotion for around 88%.
